
INTRO points

    here we are using triclustering algorithm called TriRNSC to analyze gene expression microarray data in a three-dimensional space(G,C,T), 

        gene expression means how much the gene expresses or gives information for us so that we can easily apply algorithm.
        gives info means how easily we can get info from genes.

      microarray data = slide of genes 

    clustering means grouping similar items.
    bi clustering means grouping genes based on their behavior across two things expression,conditions
    tri clustering includes time.

which domain and why clustering?

    unsupervised domain(no predefined labels)
    In clustering we don't have predefined labels we group the datapoints like using distance or some other concept.
    by grouping them we say that each group exibhit similar patterns.

why triclustering?
    it's an addition to biclustering 
    as time plays very important role in gene behaviour we have to consider triclustering.
    triclustering group items based on three constraints.

what is tricluster?
 Triclusters are groups of genes that show similar behavior across conditions and time points.

using which concept triclustering is done?

    TriRNSC is a triclustering algorithm based on restricted neighbourhood search clustering approach. 
    RNSC is a graph-based clustering method used to group elements based on their similarity within a restricted
    neighborhood.

what is graph clustering?

    graph-based clustering involves representing data as a graph, where nodes 
    represent data points and edges represent similarities or relationship b/w them. 

    TriRNSC uses graph-based clustering. 

how to say if two triclusters are similar?

    if they exibhit similar behaviour accorss different conditions and time.

how you evaluate the obtained triclusters?

    GO and KEGG pathway analysis are two bioinformatic tools used to 
    understand biological relavance of obtained triclusters. 

why you choose RNSC for clustering?
   
    it is proposed by king mostly used for detecting involuted structurs in protien protien interaction networks bascially graphs.

    becuase it is graph based. 
    graph concept has more advantages.

    bi and triclustering are NP-hard problems(they take non-exponential time)
    so we use heuristic based algorithms.

    i choose RNSC becuase it is heuristic + graph based

    It explores the solution space of all possible clusters, minimizing cost functions reflecting inter-cluster and intra-cluster edges.

how tricluster is represented?
    it is represented in 3D space 
    x-axis condition 
    y-axis time 
    z-axis gene expression or behaviour 


Q1.what i think RNSC does in graph terms?

    it is graph of connected nodes 
    where node is gene 
    link is relationship or pattern 

    more the weight of the link more the two nodes or genes 
    similar.

    so initially we start with certain weights and using RNSC algorithm
    which is heuristic algorithm we find out the approximate weights. 


Q2.what RNSC does in cluster terms? 

    it decomposes set of genes or vertexes or nodes or clusters into two 

    highly intra-connected set of nodes:
    set of nodes that have relationship stronger 

    sparesely interconnected set of nodes: 
    set of nodes that have weaker relationship among them.   

    it decomposes the large set into smaler sets or clusters 
    and again those sets into two kinds 
    again each set into two kinds. 

combining Q1 and Q2 

    clustering of a network G =(V, E ) is equivalent to partitioning the node‐set V

    we divide the node-set V into different partitions or clusters. 


    The RNSC performs the search of all possible partitions of V for a low‐cost clustering. 
    Initially, it starts its search using the naive cost function, which is a simple integer‐valued cost function followed by a more expressive, real‐valued and somehow less efficient cost function called as the scaled cost function.

    let cost function  = no.of cross edges(edges b/w two clusters)

    if more the edges b/w two clusters less effective is clustering 
    if less edges b/w two clusters more effective is clustering.

    if there is stronger edge b/w two nodes then they exibhit similar pattern why to keep them in 
    different cluster which form cross edges. 




methodology of TriRNSC algorithm. 


 phases of this work 

 phase-I  
 accqurie the data: we use yest cell cycle dataset called Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
 data pre-processing: data cleaning occurs here to make dataset suitable for analysis. 

 phase-II 
 run the TriRNSC algorithm on yeast cell cycle dataset. 
 This algorithm finds meaningful patterns in the gene expression data. 

 phase-III 
 once the results are generated to make sure these results are not just random numbers 
 but have some biological sense we perform two things. 
  i. GO term analysis 
  ii. KEGG pathway analysis



indepth phases 

 phase-I(obtain graph) 
        The goal is to create a graphical network (GCN) that shows relationships between different genes based on their expression patterns in various conditions and over multiple time points.

        Initial data is a 3D matrix representing gene expressin levels.


        expression of gene x can be represented in condtion-time plane like 
        any gene x at n conditions and t time points can be seen as 
        x=((x11,x12,...,x1t ),(x21,x22,...,x2t ),...(xn1,xn2,...,xnt ))

        pearson correlation coefficient is calculated b/w pairs of genes based on their 
        expression in condition-time plane. 

        pearson coefficient(P) b/w gene x1 and gene x2 is calculated and like this 
        for every possible pair we calculate. 
      
        P> certain threshold value 
        consider that value 
        and this value acts as edge b/w that pair of genes 
          
           x1 -- P -- x2 
        
        based on the obtained calculations we form graph network which represents how genes 
        are correlated with each other based on thier expression in condition time points. 


        summary or steps to form graph from dataset:
        
            represent gene in condition time plane 
            calculate perason corellation coefficient for every pair 
            if that is greater than some threshold value then include that edge in graph 
            form the graph 

   phase-II(apply RNSC on obtained graph)      


     we have to find best triclusters in the graph. 
     Triclusters are groups of genes that show similar behavior across conditions and time points.

     algorithm steps:

    random initialization
        
        The algorithm starts with a random cluster. It randomly selects a set of genes to form an initial tricluster. This serves as the starting point for the algorithm.

    naive triclustering(using naive cost function):

        let naive cost function be no.of cross edges. 

        algorithm shits the genes from one tricluster to another aiming to minimize 
        the naive cost function.
        like this we can quickly identify relatively good triclusters. 

    scaled triclustering(using scaled cost function):

        after obtaining tricluters with the naive cost functoin, the algorithm attempts to 
        refine the solution. It performs triclustering again but this time using a more 
        detailed scaled cost function which provides more precise triclusters. 
   
     no. of iternations of above are done depending on stopping criteria. 


     summary: 
       initialize random genes in a cluster.
       apply naive cost function 
       apply scaled cost function 
       do some iterations  


   phase-III(validate triclusters) 

    there are two methods that we use to validate obtained triclusters 

        GO term analysis: 
        validation of triclusters using gene ontology project.

        GO project has database that can be used to find whehter generated tricuster 
        has biological sense. 

        GO project checks if groupd genes or obtained triclusters make sense 
        in terms of cellular components, molecular functions and biological processes. 

        KEEGG pathway analysis 
        
        it also has database to check biological sense of obtained triclusters. 

        But it goes beyond and does mapping of genes onto known pathways and networs to understand 
        multi-level functions. 

     summary:
     they validate the things on the level of cellular functions and pathways. 


what parameters to set to RNSC algorithm?

 tabu list: a FIFO tabu list is used to keep track of moved vertices b/w clusters. 
 
 NaiveStoppingTolerance and ScaledStoppingTolerance: these are used to say when to switch b/w naive and scaled cost functions. 

 diverisification frequencies: parameters used for shuffling. 

 NumberOfExperiments: no. of iterations that algorithm runs.
 


  

what are system requirements? 
    This framework is executed in the Matlab R2014b platform. 
    The computational simulations are performed on a multiprocessor machine with the Intel XEON processor with 64 GB RAM and in the Linux environment.

what dataset contians? 

    we have 6178 number of genes analysed under 
    6 condtions(clb2, pheromone, cln3, cdc15, cdc28 and elutriation)

    final dataset has 6178 genes 4 conditions and 14 time points. 















form graph using threshold on pearson cofficient 
apply rnsc on graph by changing edges forming cross edges by applying navie cost function and scaled cost function 


finally obtain triclusters
use bioinformatics tools OG and KEEGG pathway analysis 







